it wasn't too long ago that if you
wanted good or even passable sound from
your computer you need a dedicated sound
card but nowadays even though you can
still buy them most pc enthusiasts
recommend you skip the sound card
entirely and just instead use the audio
that's integrated into your motherboard
so how did this happen to understand we
need to take a look back at why
dedicated sound cards even existed in
the first place you know that little pc
speaker that comes with some
motherboards that beeps at you and let
you know that your computer booted okay
or or has some kind of issue well way
back during the 1980s when the original
ibm pc and compatibles ruled the day a
larger version of that little speaker
was the only source of sound for many
users this means that you would be
limited to just beeps and boops though
there were some tricks that programmers
used to get the pc speaker to make other
sounds such as this bach piece that was
used as the intro to a 1982 classic
called
paratrooper as you can tell the speaker
didn't exactly sound all that great and
early pc cpus also had to more or less
drop everything else they were doing
while that speaker was trying to chirp
at you so obviously a better solution
was needed so the idea was to
offload audio processing to a separate
sound card so that the system wouldn't
have to depend solely on the main cpu
and as the years went by sound cards
supported more and more features and
better and better audio quality partly
due to their role as hardware
accelerators meaning that the extra
hardware on the sound card could do the
heavy lifting of processing all that
audio instead of leaving it all to the
cpu similar actually to the difference
between having a discreet graphics card
and onboard graphics except without a
dedicated area on the cpu die for audio
and while it is true that integrated
audio from motherboards became more
prevalent in the late 1990s thanks to
intel's ac97 audio codec that got
incorporated into onboard chips sound
cards were still more powerful solutions
that delivered noticeably better quality
so folks that care about audio didn't
have much reason to ditch sound cards
just yet that said sound cards
weren't perfect because hardware
acceleration for audio was implemented
differently by different manufacturers
you needed a specific driver for your
car to work properly kind of like how
you need a specific amd or nvidia driver
these days for your graphics card to
function and these drivers were often
notoriously poorly written and unstable
so starting in windows vista microsoft
tried to standardize how audio was
handled which also enabled features like
per application volume control from the
operating system itself and did it by
forcing the system to handle audio in
software instead of through a hardware
accelerated card this meant that the cpu
was suddenly handling a lot more audio
processing and in games and other
applications that were built around
hardware acceleration in the form of a
sound card many users experienced buggy
audio and performance issues early on
however the good news is that by this
point cpus were already powerful enough
to handle audio processing without a big
performance hit a far cry from the early
pcs we mentioned previously so as
applications start to catch up and
support software-based standards like
microsoft's universal audio architecture
it became the case that all you needed
for good quality sound was a modern cpu
and an audio device that supported uaa
such as those real tech hd audio chips
that are now ubiquitous on all
motherboards these chips are much
simpler than full blown sound cards as
much of the work that would be done by a
sound card's processor can be handled by
the main cpu of the system leaving the
real tech chip to handle simpler tasks
like digital to analog conversion and
this quality has improved on the realtek
chips themselves and motherboard
manufacturers have taken care in
designing their audio circuits so that
they won't be as affected by electrical
interference from the rest of the system
today
we're at the point where onboard audio
is actually quite good separate sound
cards while they can still give slightly
better audio quality are often only
recommended for enthusiasts who need the
extra processing muscle for niche
applications or for specific ports but
even users who need a bit more power for
their high impedance headphones are
often advised to get an external
backslash amp instead of a sound card as
external solutions are often isolated
completely from the electrically noisy
environment inside a pc but if you do
end up needing a sound card for
some reason don't think that their
development has been totally neglected i
mean
after all you can get them with rgb this
video is brought to you by monday.com
monday.com is the productivity tool that
helps you manage your work it's simple
to set up for you and your team and it's
super customizable you can import any
data that you need and share it with
whoever needs to be on that project you
can track project progress at a glance
with different view options and you can
automate tasks so you can focus on
getting work done monday.com is awesome
because it integrates with tons of
third-party products like excel slack
jira dropbox the list just goes on and
on so sign up today for an extended 30
day free trial at the link below so
thanks for watching guys like this video
subscribe follow us do all that stuff
and also hit us up in the comments with
your suggestions for topics that we
should hit in the future